okay the last talk of the conference I'm quite
tired I hope you are awake this is going to be not
too technical and I hope a bit entertaining wow that's a
good start yeah my name is Hilke and I'm here
to dream about the future of the atmosphere for artists I am
an artist myself I mainly do music you can find all that
on my website hilk.
eu I'm also a software developer very recently I started a
new job at Betsy that's a very indie ticketing
service in Switzerland and I also help out a bit at North
Sky this happens to be my very first post on the atmosphere
it's a paraphrasing a post by Alok a
statement by Alok like the only identity I really chose for
myself is to be an artist because being an artist it's
about being creative it's about imagination it's resists every
definition when something like a queer or a trans identity that's
more how other people see you how the society puts you in
boxes and it's like shaped by discrimination patterns and you can
reclaim that identity and I think we do that as a community
but for me personally my my gender expression is as much
it for me it's the same thing as the music it
's like it's like an output of my of my creative
drive so that's a little side note about the relationship between
my artist and my queer identity but why the hell did I
become a software developer I got an interest in the internet and
in technology around 2007 when we had the first wave of social
media apps and back then for me it felt very empowering as
an artist my space in the beginning changed the relationship between between
artists and fans soundcloud and band camp came on the scene
also youtube twitter facebook and then when instagram came it gave like
gave like a visual identity to artists so that felt empowering because
it it became possible to talk directly from artist to fan to
be in some kind of community or or um communication so back
then I was like yeah we can like pass bypass the traditional
gatekeepers of the music industry um yeah and that felt empowering
like I said a couple of years later around 2010
I was lucky to be part of this band the person in
the front that's an earlier younger version of me um and
we had this um quite a big radio hit in a very
small country belgium um and yeah um be that was
um that opened a lot of doors um it was a combination
of traditional radio and press but also the new social media band
camp quite a lot of sales there um so from the outside
it was like a success story with which we toured internationally
but in in in reality it was not financially sustainable so after
a couple of years in 2016 I decided uh to switch careers
uh I took an internship as a software developer because I was
working in technological stuff because of what I told before so that
is what I've been doing the last 10 years to to
earn money but I still kept making music so let's flash
forward what does it mean to be an artist in 2024 actually
that is be very present on instagram um even better by ads
on instagram uh those ads you you should you uh point the
people to spotify uh to convert them to to listeners um
to generate place that will not bring you money or you really
need a lot a lot of place but when those those statistics
look good on instagram and on spotify then you can convince
show promoters that you might sell tickets and then when people
come to your shows that is how your career can somehow start
to grow that is so a bit the situation um maybe tick
tock comes into the game i must say most of my
peers are 30 plus so we we start we are still figuring
it out and we find it not very creative and very annoying
um so the conclusion is 15 years later the gatekeeping is
completely back um and it's driven by two or three big
tech companies and that's not even um people that's like
an algorithm that you are fighting with so you might wonder is
that a mistake to 24 it was on purpose because for me
25 and my friends uh was a big wake-up call at
the beginning of the year when trump got re-elected um
maybe naive for some people but that was like oh yeah some
statements by zuckerberg of course those companies are um super
capitalistic but actually they also align with authoritarian and fascist
regimes um so yeah what do you do as a queer artist
then um so um i gathered with with my peers with my
peers with my friends um we organized some some workshops to try
to find out what to do stay leave find alternatives um um
because i have this technical background i was looking also to the
technical solutions and like um informing people about that how does this
all work um i looked at the fatty first um in the
beginning more that and then i'll more and more at the
atmosphere and i had the impression that it's like more suited
for for um what musicians need um if they want to build
some more reach i started explaining everybody uh how this works i
created a starter starter pack i created a custom mute music feed
of my local scene in switzerland um yeah a lot of
explaining trying to convince to make an account to make an account
to start posting it leads it needs a lot of uh repetition
and patience um because the problem is a bit um we still
have to be on instagram we cannot just leave it because our
audience is there so we need to still put time in there
um and this means that most artists are quite burned out from
social media they want to be less on social media um they
are low on resources and yeah when you then say let's
try out this new these new channels it's difficult because they
are really they have had enough um but there are some of
them who do it who are like that more political drive or
something like that or yeah i don't know so that's
the reality but this talk was about dreams so let's start
dreaming i have four of them um they go from very pragmatic
to something more artistic and for the last two i built a
little prototype um the last month i was here in vanc
ouver at zspace card of kind of residency thanks to bor
is that i could be his guest um yeah so i finally
got to code something um but the first we are not that
much about code my first theme is about connection finding that connection
again that we used to have on instagram so i think what
we really need is a real alternative to instagram with more product
maturity and i don't want to this uh splashes and
that kind of apps this like one person project but i really
hope that sebastian gets much more resources that that the product
can improve um and and that it is like what blue skies
to micro blogging that we um something have for um um
what i i don't know if i went invented the word
microvisual right now um but yeah artists they don't
really think in this micro blocking format they think more in visually
i'm not very valid visually but most of us do um
so yeah we need a good platform to have like a visual
language on on the on the protocol there are such things like
you try to explain this yeah you would want something like instagram
download flashes but then it's like a blue sky account and
it's so complicated to to to um to explain that so
if if it would be more mature then maybe we can we
can get past that friction i also noticed that in in my
community there is an important distance between the feeds of the fe
ats of the normal feet of posts and the stories um and
stories are not really a thing on flashes yet i think um
to explain that um we see the feats much more as
a an an our a curated artist identity so it needs to
look good it's like it's thought through um stories that
are much more uh spontaneous um we go a lot to each
other's shows make a quick video uh upload it the artist
re reposts it and it can be bad quality song
out of pit of tune doesn't matter it's way after
24 hours but you don't want to have that in your
feet um for eternity of course you can delete but it's
it's yeah it's just a different a different a different
medium so that's like the skeuomorphism that is
missing for us right now um those are basics i discovered also
a couple of nice to have for the last weeks it would
be really great to have like an integration with event lexic
ons um so that you would scroll your feed you see like
a video with an announcement of a show and there's a
link to something smoke signal like and you can just do i
will attend um i've been talking to a lot of a
couple of music venues and i still use facebook events for over
40 drum and bass and rock concerts because it's it's
still works a bit it's almost over so it would be
really great to have that back just like oh all my friends
are going and it gives also some security to uh show promot
ers that people will will turn up so that would be cool
um i also noticed last month i have been posting quite some
music i did like at proto music march i think more or
less i don't remember the name um i post a lot
of band camp links um band camp links have like artwork so
it's visually good material but because it's not really a
photo and defeated will not show up on flashes so it would
be cool that that would also work nice dream 2 inspiration
how am i on time because i have no idea um
okay what then i've been thinking what could be even more
inspiring an app that would be specifically about music and art um
and how i think about it i would like it to have
its different spaces that aligns a with the earlier talks that
's the disadvantage of being the last talk um yeah what i
would like to have is that uh to have also these quick
updates right like instagram like personal feed what are my what are
the new shows what are the new releases um in this micro
visual micro-blogling style but i would also like a
much more curated part that goes much deeper into uh the artist
's work and that slows us down um the pace i'm
thinking about is like the artist of the month um like really
one month uh there is this one artist that you can go
deep into you can really immerse yourself deeply into the world
um and after some talks this sounds a bit boring now now
but some of the ideas that uh i had like yeah maybe
they can present a feed of the accounts that that they in
find interesting maybe they have a selection of long form articles that
they want to point you to like that is the things that
uh influenced me i i like a lot uh leaflet um
feed on blue sky because it's it points me this store
to more long form content um and that goes deeper um it
could be something like what are the favorite albums what are the
favorite books um but to be honest what i would love the
most to see is like anything that this artist can imagine that
would be on this app and after the talk of dame
and also of uh what was uh the name of the last
talk you it was like yeah that would be that would be
that would be cool to have something like that there for one
month um i can also see some spillovers into the
offline world um if there are this
uh you you you you
you you you you you you
you you you you you you you you
you you
you
you you you you you you you
you you
you you you
you
you you
you you you
you
you you
you you you
you
you you
you permission data for that.
Of course, player.
fm is also going that direction.
That's what I learned this weekend.
So we will probably collaborate on that.
Yeah, I made some proof of concept with encryption.
It's in a PR.
I didn't want to have it in the main branch.
Yeah, I guess when the permission data are there, we will have
better solutions for that.
The fourth dream is about creation.
That's something that I've been thinking about for many
years.
The internet changed a lot how we promote and distribute our music,
but not that much how we create music.
It's mainly a play button, and people push the button, and
they listen to the same recording.
And I found it a bit limiting, and I saw so many
possibilities.
But somehow, the time was not right, Nat.
So my question is, what do we do if we redefine
the music formats for social internet?
Because music is supposed to be a social experience, and we actually
unlearn to listen to music together.
So I have this idea a couple of years already.
But now I thought, this is the right time to build a
demo of that idea.
I'm not sure how to pronounce it yet, but to the
end or something like that.
And let's try the demo.
So what it tries to do is to motivate people to listen
to music together in the same place, physically together with each other.
Oh yeah, I have to say, please don't try it out
yet, because it ruins my explanation.
And David will be my volunteer to make it work, and after
that, you can also all try it.
I'm curious what will happen if we all do it.
OK, I logged in.
Now I can join the music experience.
This will create a record on my PDS that I want,
that I will join this.
It needs to know where I am because we want to track
physical distance, so I'm going to allow that.
The first song of this project is two to the first power.
I can listen to the music alone.
It's so ambient track that I made the last
couple of weeks.
But what would happen if we listen to it with two people,
because two to the first, like two people.
And I would like to invite David
to join.
So what happens if he joins, the arrangement becomes richer, there are
like more layers to the music.
Yeah, that's like the idea I had, and that I could
make quite easily with this.
If you want to join, I'm very curious what will happen.
It will break.
No.
Just sit back and listen.
Oh.
Just sit back and
listen.
Just sit back
and listen.
How are we with
time?
Do we want questions or do we want to navigate with this
music?
It's not that long anymore, I think.
I'm not
going
to go.
Oh, some other people are listening on speaker,
huh?
I'm going to stop it.
Yeah, nine people, ten.
Oh, not bad.
I have one more secret dream that next year at
the next Atmosphere Conference I can perform the last piece
of this project which should be two to the tenth.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Hilke.
This was a very inspiring way to end the conference.
Yeah, we have time for maybe one or two questions.
I know the closing remarks are going to be starting in about
ten minutes.
So, yeah.
Do we have any?
Yes, one sec.
Hilke, thanks so much for this inspiring talk and for being
the first in the atmosphere who speaks publicly about bringing artists to
the protocol.
I am really impressed by the two to the end.
But I want to comment on the, actually, you already answered the
question in a way, but when you talked about doing the artist
of the month, I was thinking of this could actually create some
kind of competition with attention economy.
So, because any, like, any kind of institution is bringing the artist
of the month and this is creating some kind of where should
I look for the artist of the month.
And I was thinking what we could do instead in the atmosphere
is like building tools for music circles, like small groups of people.
I mean, you answered this already now, but this is something maybe
we should not forget.
So, like, people bring together in a room and then don't
have the artist in, like artist of the month, but have a
group of people who are artists, but are at the same time
people who enjoy art.
And then maybe they can select among themselves the artist who should
be in the spotlight for this event or for another event.
So, yeah, and I really appreciate that you think of, was it
the, including the creation process.
So, this is not a question, I should have said this before,
it's just, I'm just impressed and I want to say
thank you for doing this for us.
Yeah, thank you.
Yeah, definitely the artist of the month, I was also not really
sure because it's some kind of curation, but it couldn
't be.
I think I was thinking, it shouldn't be, I was thinking
a bit in the same direction, maybe it should be like, do
we say estafete in English?
I don't know, like you give, there is one artist and
they give it to the next or something like that.
Oh, like a torch, pass the torch.
Torch, pass the torch, yeah, something like that.
Yeah, it's, I mean, it's not about nominating an
artist, for me it's more about going really deeply into someone
's work.
Yeah, it's not about choosing something, it's about finding depth
in, in a story of one artist.
But thank you for your comment.
What do you hope to do next with 2N,
what do you want to do next, yeah.
Um, yeah, I think, what was nice about this, it took me
only two days to program it and I had more time for
music.
I think this is one of the exciting things now with, with,
with, with, with, uh, agents.
Um, I'm certainly going to make more music.
So, the concept is that you need to be with more and
more people, right.
Um, it's, I think it's also challenging from a musical
perspective, how do you make that work together.
Um, I think it's, like, now there are two versions, but,
like, if there are four people, maybe it would be cool that
there are, like, four parts that also work on their own, but
then together, and then they would be different.
And if you would be only two people, then it would also
work.
Like, that's the, that kind of thing that I find interesting
as, as a composer or some writer.
Um, yeah, I, I can imagine, I don't know if it
's worth it, it's, it's, it's, it's sort
of a game, but maybe it's a model that more artists
want to use and then we can make it into some crazy
music service.
Cool.
Thank you so much, Hilke.
Thank you.
Thank you, everyone.